NTP (Network Time Protocol)

NTP is a protocol that synchronizes the clocks of routers, switches, servers, and PCs across a network. Each device has its own internal clock, and without NTP these clocks slowly drift apart. NTP uses UDP port 123.

Why accurate time matters for NTP:
- Log messages and syslog timestamps can be correlated across many devices during troubleshooting.
- Digital certificates and VPNs check validity dates, so a wrong clock can cause authentication failures.
- Security investigations depend on knowing exactly when an event happened.

NTP stratum levels:
NTP uses stratum numbers to describe the distance from an accurate time source. Stratum 0 is a reference clock such as an atomic clock or GPS receiver. Stratum 1 servers are directly connected to a stratum 0 device. Each additional hop adds 1 to the stratum. The maximum usable stratum is 15, and stratum 16 means the device is unsynchronized. A lower stratum is considered more accurate.

NTP modes:
- Client: gets time from an NTP server but does not provide time to others.
- Server: provides time to clients. A Cisco router can be both client and server.
- Symmetric active (peer): two devices synchronize with each other as peers.
- Broadcast: a server sends time to the whole LAN, and clients listen without sending requests.
A router that syncs from an upstream server with ntp server automatically serves time to its own clients, at its stratum plus 1. Peers are set with ntp peer.

How NTP clients choose a server:
1. The client polls each configured server and measures delay, offset, and jitter.
2. Servers with stratum 16, or whose time disagrees with the others (falsetickers), are rejected.
3. Among the good servers, a lower stratum and lower delay and jitter are preferred.
4. The chosen server is the sys.peer, marked with an asterisk.
The prefer keyword, as in ntp server 192.168.1.1 prefer, makes a server the first choice. Configuring several servers gives redundancy.

NTP client configuration:
Router(config)# ntp server 192.168.1.1
Router(config)# ntp source Loopback0
Router(config)# ntp update-calendar
The ntp source command uses a stable loopback address for NTP packets, and ntp update-calendar copies NTP time to the hardware calendar.

Router as an NTP master:
If no external time source exists, a router can act as an authoritative source using its own clock.
Router(config)# ntp master 3
This makes the router advertise itself as stratum 3.
Without a number, ntp master uses stratum 8 by default.

NTP authentication:
Authentication ensures that clients only accept time from trusted servers.
Router(config)# ntp authenticate
Router(config)# ntp authentication-key 1 md5 NtpKey123
Router(config)# ntp trusted-key 1
Router(config)# ntp server 192.168.1.1 key 1

NTP time zone configuration:
Router(config)# clock timezone ICT 7
NTP always carries time in UTC, and the time zone setting adjusts the local display.

NTP verification commands:
- show ntp status: shows whether the clock is synchronized, the stratum, and the reference server.
- show ntp associations: lists NTP servers and peers; an asterisk marks the server currently used.
- show clock detail: shows the current time and the time source, such as NTP.

NTP verification output explained:
R1# show ntp associations
  address        ref clock     st  when  poll  reach  delay  offset  disp
*~192.168.1.1    10.0.0.1       2    35    64    377    1.2    0.45   0.9
The * means this is the sys.peer in use, and ~ means it was configured. A + marks a good candidate, - an outlier, and x a falseticker. The st column is the server's stratum. Reach 377 means the last 8 polls all succeeded. Poll is the interval in seconds, between 64 and 1024.

NTP show ntp status output explained:
R1# show ntp status
Clock is synchronized, stratum 3, reference is 192.168.1.1
R1 is stratum 3, one more than its stratum 2 server.

NTP troubleshooting:
- Clock is unsynchronized: wait, because synchronization can take several minutes.
- Server unreachable: test with ping and check routing.
- UDP port 123 blocked by an ACL or firewall.
- The server shows stratum 16, so it is not synchronized itself and cannot be used.
- Authentication key number or password mismatch, or a missing ntp trusted-key.
- Wrong time zone: the time is correct in UTC, but clock timezone is wrong.

CCNA exam tips for NTP:
- NTP uses UDP 123.
- Lower stratum is better; stratum 16 means unsynchronized.
- An asterisk in show ntp associations marks the server in use.
- ntp master makes a router an authoritative time source.

Common questions about NTP:

Q: What port does NTP use?
A: NTP uses UDP port 123.

Q: What does stratum 16 mean?
A: Stratum 16 means the device is not synchronized and cannot be used as a time source.

Q: How does an NTP client choose between several servers?
A: It rejects bad servers and prefers the one with the lowest stratum and lowest delay and jitter, unless a server is marked with prefer.

Q: How do you verify NTP is working?
A: Use show ntp status to see if the clock is synchronized and show ntp associations to see the server marked with an asterisk.

Q: What does the ntp master command do?
A: It makes the router an authoritative NTP source using its own clock, at the stratum given, such as ntp master 3.
